The national carrier.
Thank you. Uh, and up the front,
and of course, the team behind as well.
So, uh, welcome to all.
Thank you for, for, uh, accepting our invitation.
'cause we're very, uh, understanding of the fact that you,
uh, are not required, uh, to come, come here itself.
So we're, we're appreciative of being able
to have a conversation.
So even though this is scrutiny weak for us, we see this
as just wanting to engage and,
and better understand how you've been going and,
and where your challenges are, also,
where your successes are, et cetera.
So, uh, we have, uh, the presentation that looks like on,
on digitally in front of us, uh, for your beginning of that.
And we will start there with just, uh,
some opening comments, uh, from you.
And then we'll go from there. So,
Uh, there it is.
Vision is to restore te as a nurturing first language.
Uh, so from the inception of,
of our COPA tomato, why this has been, we need to identify,
this has been our major objective and,
and we'll delve into some of the, uh, uh, the UA
or the many benefits of this copa,
particularly over the past year.
Uh, we'll get into that detail a little bit later on.
So, Tamay was created through to Maori,
uh, recognizing Maori should lead their own language revival
so that teil was safe when intergenerational transmission
is uninterrupted.
So we work across the following four areas,
our representation through tere,
and in the establishment of our eight.
Uh, we provide information
and investment for Maori language revitalization, uh,
leadership of the Mai Maori strategy, and to lead
and indeed advise across te or,
and we work in active partnership with the Crown.
So, um, I think you would all know
that this is a really unique, um, structure, uh,
that we have Rio's conceptual framework that underpins
and reflects the partnership approach, um, as the foundation
of Maori language revitalization.
Um, AWA is located on the Tara
and is where Wai champions a Maori led approach
to language revitalization, uh,
while also working in partnership with Crown Agencies
to ensure the effective resourcing of our iwi
and communities and the synchronization
of our collective impact.
We're gonna move now to our journey to Hawaii,
and this is a bit of a progress update.
So our two main priority outcomes are now,
and now these we believe are central
to the health and indeed the development of TE Maori
as a living language.
Uh, we developed new definitions
and are building our data system to capture
and track our progress on these two critical pathways.
So this will ensure our funding is being targeted,
it's deliberate to create the most impact,
as well as capture corridor.
And the impacts on those who are at are attending
our revitalization initiatives.
Uh, following on from that, we also gather
feedback from applicants
and participants to ensure our goals are having impact
for Maori,
and also to understand the types of impacts we are having.
Um, staying with the copa, uh, to Wai, impact to Wai are,
are, we believe we are enablers
and not the doers of revitalization.
Since going operational,
TEMA has invested almost $94 million into over
1900 initiatives that revitalize TE Maori.
96% of Dawa invested, Kopa supported
intergenerational transmission of Del between the years
of 24 and 25.
We believe Tamay is a safe pair of hands.
We remain a fiscally prudent
and effective organization
that manages its finances responsibly
and efficiently to achieve its goals.
And this is evident in our three very good
ESCO assessment rating since 2021.
As you can see in the presentation diagram there,
One of the really important things, uh,
is the impacts on the ground
and hr, I do want to, uh, acknowledge our MP from,
because I remember the last time we were here, mm,
you talked about the impacts in manga too.
Mm. And with your mom and,
and the course, we are all very closely connected to the,
and it is beautiful to see the impacts.
And we have, uh, behind me from
who is representing awa
because one of the examples that we've,
we've given is in regards to,
and I think it's actually better for, for, uh,
um, that's one of the things is that the, uh, we've just
identified some, some examples of where things matter.
And also it's about, it's not just about you,
it's also about al in context.
It's real in relevance
because you can have classes for this, that, and whatever,
but it actually has to be living.
So that's one of the really important things about the,
in terms of the, the impacts on the ground, is
that she's the impacts in the home,
it's the impacts on the mara's, the impacts in the,
in the community and sim impacts for our, our.
And
So, as Ki has mentioned,
and, uh, we've got three examples of, uh,
and you know, as I say, these are only three of many t
thees, hot springs and mud pools.
UA building the capability of hanau
one URA at a time was set up by iwi trust te
to revive and indeed retain il Maori among the Iwi,
offering classes for beginners, experts,
and everyone in between.
So I think that's quite an important point as well, is that,
you know, there are, uh, whanau members
that are at different stages of their deal journey,
be it beginners, intermediate, and the more fluent.
So, uh, a like that is.
Um, and they actually, uh, one of our most popular, uh,
kopa that we, that we support, uh,
both at a regional and national level.
Uh, Modi, uh, Modi is a led by Du
and Kaos actually
focusing on the revitalization of Il Maori
through the traditional art of Moko.
Now, this Copa integrates linguistic, cultural
and ancestral knowledge offering ate the opportunity
to deepen their connection to Il Maori Tik Maori,
and our environment to taal mainly within the Kato region.
Activities include pki proverbial sayings
related to Taha,
and understanding the cultural significance
of native trees in crafting aka.
And finally, our final example there
au are finding joy in advancing their Maori skills
through art at weekly au ma classes in te Palm North.
Oma is, and who are committed to using te Maori at home
and want to expand their language used
by creating art together.
It is the brainchild of Tanya au, a trained KO teacher,
and Ang and a adult
ma and artist.
I think too, just that these three Kapa are a good example
of how at tomato we are trying to, um,
preference, uh, what, what Teki would refer to
as the Kapa Maori pathway, um, where
Teki can begin their Maori education journey through Ang on
Maori and, and, um, hopefully
to one of the three one.
And, um, yeah, so those are good examples of that.
Just moving on to the specialist advisory group.
Um, just an update about that.
Um, at the last, uh, select committee, we noted
that we had commissioned in partnership with the Minister
for Maori Development, the specialist advisory group
to identify ways the Maori language sector can work together
to achieve the best Maori outcomes possible.
The significant piece of mahi is about how we to t ma, uh,
Maori order agencies starting with the core entities.
I know you've spoken to some of them today,
can work better together to achieve shared
Maori revitalization goals and objectives.
The group's advice was guided
by the following shared ambitions of TE
and the Minister for Maori Development, a Maori
speaking Maori, and increasing intergenerational
transmission to achieve that goal.
And B, restoring Maori
as a nurturing first language within Maori homes
and communities supported by positive,
broader societal attitudes
and what is required to achieve that impact.
The group presented their report to Tam
and the Minister in June this year.
There were 10 recommendations provided to AWA
and the minister have agreed
to begin working on progressing the first four
recommendations, a being to define KAORI
as a matter of priority B, focus both the Mahi, Corona
and Ma Maori on the shared definition of Kori
C, reset, and d establish a single chief
executive forum to support.
We are working with Ari
and the Maori language entities
to progress the recommendations.
We had our firsta a couple of weeks ago, uh,
to begin defining Kim Maori,
If I can just pick up on, uh, Brenda, that Hui was, um,
really hugely beneficial, uh,
and an opportunity, as I say, for us to,
to get alongside our, our partners.
We may all be on a different Waka, um, grabbing the analogy
of as we, you know, rode towards Una Una.
Um, but at the end of the day, it's, you know,
that is the goal was so, while we might be on different Waka
Maori, um, at the end of the day,
the bigger goal is for us to ensure
that we have this, uh, you know.
So are you ready for some questions?
Oh, we're almost there. Okay. Mr.
Cle, almost there's been a long day.
Um, just very quickly we're gonna look to the year ahead.
Uh, work is underway to host a t the forum where
Ari members meet with ministers from Terio.
This will be the first time
that ministers from this coalition government will meet
with us, uh, also UA with Maori language entities.
We will work and continue to work collaboratively
with Maori language entities.
As I just, um, explained earlier to define Kori Maori.
Uh, t this is a program designed to support
au Maori speaking Tam across the motu
and also homeA 26, 27 registrations opened this week
for our next investment round.
So we are very, very busy. Yeah.
Um, even in the lead up to Christmas.
Um, Steve, we'll go straight
to you for the first question. Sure.
Uh, Yeah, AMI, thank
You very much for being here today.
Good to see, um, and, um,
We, I'm sure all celebrate
and recognize what you are setting out to achieve
and endorse it.
I hope I can speak for Yeah.
Um, your specific objective
of increasing the use of thrill in homes.
Um, what is your feeling about the, um, findings in the
state of Terre Maori language report?
Um, that whilst there's strong public support
for Terre growing, um, an increasing number
of students learning it, um, finding
that Terre Maori has been used more in public
by younger people, but home use is declining, um,
and that this is a concern with the ambition
of intergenerational transmission.
I wonder in terms of your specific goals,
how you reflect on that finding?
Well, I think, um, it's always a concern for us. Mm.
Until our language is no longer, um, deemed
to be in a unsafe position, it will always be a concern.
Um, one of the things is that, um, yes, we want everyone
to support the revitalization of the language.
Mm. But we actually know research supports this,
that only the people who belong to that language, um,
can actually lead the revitalization.
So that's why it's really important to start with families
who have already made that commitment
or who have a, um, love of the language
and want to make that central in their homes.
Mm-hmm. And when we talk about kaa,
we are not just talking about the household.
Mm-hmm. We might be talking about, um, a group of homes
that are, uh, connected to a Mara or, or in a urban setting.
Um, the key thing is that we support those families
because we know that they will revitalize the language,
you know, our stats and show us that.
Um, and then everyone else.
So, um, we're about everyone,
but a priority sort of step by step
Got on. And then that's
the, um, the understanding in terms
of the theory of revitalization is exactly as you describe.
It's like, um, fueling the fire
where the embers are hot, so to speak.
Yes. And from there it can expand.
So you, you, you're not too disheartened by that finding.
You think it's just part of the cycle of
where we are getting to with a new generation whose kids
will be raised in a household that speaks fluently,
We hope.
Yeah. I think probably just, just to add to that is
that it's also about confidence.
And when you hear, you know, the community I live in,
that we live in, when de Maori has spoken openly in public,
that actually gives people confidence.
This is the same place for me to exercise my real
and my culture and my identity.
So yeah, that's, yeah.
In the public, uh, domain, you know,
that's a, a really important thing.
Uh, but of course what comes to, and we know from experience
and lived experience is that when you have the
Dominic, you have these other
who actually are attracted to that
because they say it's a safe place.
The safe place is a safe space.
So they're drawn to that as well. Yeah.
So yeah, those figures are
saying what those figures are saying.
Yeah. But okay.
And then mean we have to be hopeful. Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. Yeah. Great.
Yes. So just to step on
that festival, thank you so much for that.
Um, uh, so yeah, over the last day
and a half, we've, um, had the privileges speaking with uni.
Um, um,
It's a nice talk And then obviously the, the, the, the,
the, the grand one yourselves.
Um, it has been interesting, uh, uh, that it has led
to this discussion
because, um, it, it, it, all
of the conversa pre previous conversations do seem
to zero in on where, where Steve's question was at which,
and, and, and is echoed by these findings, which is
that it's, it's in the home where, where,
where, where it must happen.
I was reminded, um, Nawi
and I, uh, um, reshared a story that he shared
for the first time last year around one
of his own sons who's obviously been raised in the, in the,
and or, um,
or, um, uh, Fadi.
However, he doesn't speak now, um,
at home unless he has to.
Uh, and he doesn't really speak anywhere else, um,
because it's, it's just not, um, it's not the, uh, it's not,
it's not, it's not the, um, language of any
of the other places that he finds himself in.
So what I have found myself over the last 3, 6, 48 hours
thinking, and I was,
but I was thinking a lot of it was 12 months ago, but yeah.
But when I first, um, had the opportunity to, to speak
with y, but, um, I look at the, um, so
what se 70 million, um, to Mai to Mai pa, roughly,
I think it's 50 to, for ka Maori, I forget what it is to,
but you look at all, like, within all of that,
it's the reason provocative question,
you guys are maybe getting maybe 10%
of the total allocation.
And yet all of the research seems
to be pointing towards the fact that the work
that you are doing is arguably where we need
to be most focusing.
Um, so that's a, it's a, it's been provocative question,
but can I ask you to, to speak to your thoughts of when you,
when you look out to 2040 with this ambitious
and beautiful goal, having a million people
who can actually genuinely, um, this is their,
um, do you think that we're doing all that we need to do
to actually be driving towards that, that ambitious goal?
We are certainly not thinking that we would take from
the good work of our Yeah.
Colleagues to Yeah. Stuff our ours.
But I, I think we've always spoken about the imbalance
of the fa mm-hmm. Yeah. Yeah,
Yeah. Yeah. And I
appreciate that. Yeah.
Thank you for the frank answer. Yeah.
So it's on that fa can,
Can we evolve that question then a little bit further?
Is the structure of the many entities involved in the
re Maori is, is that part of our challenge
of accelerating what we're found to be doing?
Well, uh, more with the, with the limited understanding
that our PYA is not increasing at this stage.
And, and we, we need to, we want to do as much
as we can with what we've got.
Okay. Well, that's the purpose of the, you know,
report we commissioned Yeah.
With the minister is to, um,
try to gather information that helps us
to make more informed decis decisions about
an effective spend.
You know, because we are caught in this situation
where there's, it's not an endless pool of money.
Yeah. Yeah. So we have to do our very best.
And for us, that's our, the very best, by the hopes
and aspirations of our people,
it's every day we have in our minds the pathway
that was laid before us.
You know, that means tomato even arrives in 2025, as in
as mm-hmm.
So, um, what our people say out in the regions,
our iwi, the au, um,
and the 10 legacy groups that we represent,
um, the communities.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah.
That's really important to, um, the messages
that we bring about the spend.
Mm-hmm.
Just to add to that, there are multiple pathways
to language acquisition and language implementation.
And so, uh, you
can't pinpoint any one thing.
Is this through a whole lot of there and
or it's gonna fix whatever, you know, is seen to be, uh,
a problem or, uh, an issue because everyone is different.
I think that's a really important thing.
Looking at the examples that were given today of
Pop on the Ground, it's in the context of their lives.
It's in the context of what's important to them.
It's what resonates with them.
And that's one of the things that with the, is
that we are looking at, uh, yes, the report has being,
reports being commissioned, yes, we have this,
this information, this data,
but on the ground, that's where you see the real fruits.
That's where you see the real, you know, there's, there's a
and mm-hmm.
And yeah, I'm looking at, uh, uh, mr
there and like in the context of, you know, Hmm.
You know,
and so there's a context there.
It's the same thing in the world of, of, of Kaka.
It's the same thing, whether you're talking aka
or whatever context is important.
And so we've gotta, yes, we can look at these numbers
and we can say, right, okay,
this is an issue we've actually gotta remember
on the ground in people's lives.
That's what really matters. Yeah.
Yeah. And I'll just add to that, hey, is that, um,
I remember one of the, um, tunnel that came through
and, um, one of the Kai said to me, you know what,
it's actually not about the transaction,
it's about the transformation within our whanau,
our hapu and our iwi.
So, you know, it's, it's, it's an indication of,
um, for our people.
They appreciate, they absolutely appreciate our help
and they're seeing those, I guess, um, who are
benefits within their own families.
Hapu, marai level. Grassroots level.
Okay. Questions.
Alright. And if, if, oh no, you go Thank,
Uh, yeah, RA thank you for your time.
Um, I guess just wanna understand a bit of how you connect
with, you know, everything from our universities,
our Ang um, two agencies
and, um, yeah, I'm really privileged, my family, um,
my husband's been on the journey
and has reclaimed his language through tier or awa and,
but this can see sort of where you fit in, what your kind
of role is, INED, places like that, and around the country
and, and also other agencies and,
and how that comes together to, obviously it's you,
the home is what I'm hearing, which I agree with.
But how do, how do we bring,
yeah, how do you bring all that together?
Well, it's through our, that we talked about before.
So the, um, eight pki Okay.
Um, that, that represent the iwi.
But also, um, the p
which is the pie that represents the 10, um,
we call legacy groups named in the act.
And, um, included in that is the,
which is the three includes.
And, um, I nearly forgot my name.
Um, and um, yeah, so that's how we represent
and they, they form a, um, cluster
with the national.
Um, and that's called Hmm.
It's interesting though, 'cause um,
and again, there's nothing to take anything away from Ana.
I mean, wonderful. Yeah.
Um, but I find also particularly in the, that a lot
of our people love to come back to their own marae.
They, they, they have a sense of, of actually going to Ang.
'cause there's this kind of perception that, you know,
the kayaks in, in front of them
and you know, you're gonna make a mistake in front
of all your friends and stuff.
So I, I've seen it within my own iwi that
my nanga my relatives find it far more, um, inviting
for want of a word or two to come to Al Marai
and make the mistakes in front of their cousins.
And Yeah. And their, you know, aunties
and uncles, they feel far more
hanni and they're uncomfortable there.
And yeah. Because I know also the challenges somewhere
like Kawa, which obviously is reputation around the country,
but then, you know, my husband's from far north.
Yeah. And, but he is, you know, it's obviously, you know,
it's the crop upper of Yeah.
Iwi there. And so that can, there
are challenges there, but it's,
Yeah. So I think that's
what differentiates the Kapa that we are,
you know, supporting at that more grassroots level.
Mm-hmm. Um, yeah.
It seems to, um, bring more more of our people in.
I think what's also great. Sorry, um, to
Your question, do you mind just coming
To the mic?
Actually, You can be all.
Just to add what, uh, far Brenda was just saying, it's,
it's really comes down to the uniqueness
of all the individual and actually understanding the state
of everyone's nation, um, identifying particular partners
or other champions that are doing this thing in Te Maori.
So, for instance, in my particular area, uh, area,
we have some cities that have a bilingual framework.
And so it's actually about us being innovative with working
with those particular partners
and finding a wider reach
to our communities that we, we serve.
Um, that enables us also to access those who aren't
of Maori descent, uh, to be able to participate, uh,
in a space of learning, which obviously is fun for all.
So, um, it's quite unique
and in what we are doing at the moment
and reaching out to particular tertiary institutions, uh,
organizations, but also working with Iwi.
Mm-hmm. Um, and finding a way forward
where we can equally invest in that same space
for re not all iwi or Hapu are ready,
but that's why we have tu haki in each particular region
to be, to understand what those aspirations are for language
for all parts of our community.
So we are actively in a, growing that space at the moment,
um, because, you know, the penny doesn't go too far.
And so therefore it's about being proactive and,
and building those relationships.
And
So, so there, there are shared goals
and objectives between Iwi and between our,
but is different to a data context
and different, again, to context, which I represent in terms
of the way, because you have the
turn geographical distance
and a whole lot of other types of dynamics.
So, yeah, once again, it's a, it's a big area to cover.
And so yeah, we, we, once again, it does come down
to context and what actually is important to, uh,
to those respective iwi.
'cause they're not all the same. Even like in the top
of the south island, the, you've got eight iwi there.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. And they're all connected to one another
through history, through, but,
and they have shared, uh, they have shared objectives,
but they have also slightly different priorities
or they have different ways of wanting
to make this a reality.
So yeah, we've got, we take all those things into account,
uh, especially when they, they come to us
and say, this is what we wanna do.
Okay.
And we've also been able to prioritize,
um, joint ventures.
So it might be, for example, um,
a group of people learning through the method and uh,
but it's very focused in a certain tribal area.
So we, so we would be able to cross the, like the, that
where sits might fund some of it
and the iwi pa that's gonna benefit from
that might fund some of it.
So, um, really encouraging across the legacy groups too for,
um, for example, AU might use to
help the parents upskill in their language.
Our time has disappeared on us very quickly,
but I'll allow one last question.
Are we done? I, quick one. Yeah.
One last question, uh, maybe doesn't allow a quick answer,
but I was wondering about Ur Maori order.
Like those, that group of you that meets every six weeks.
Mm-hmm. Yep. And, uh, how valuable is that for you
to be working across different, so we understand
that you meet with the Maori
to manga Mm.
Ministry of Education. Is that a thing?
Are we misinformed on that? Maybe slightly. It's research.
Oh, research.
Oh, oh, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's that second.
My best just,
just come to the microphone.
Daaz, sorry.
We have that, that group was actually set up as part of,
um, um, and
Which is the, um, uh, meeting between tomato y um,
and ministers, um, felt that it would be useful
to have a group that worked across the mm-hmm.
And so that has been one of the sort of successes of,
um, the joint approach.
Um, and here, um, which is a, um,
predictive, predictive report,
which you may have already heard about, which is telling us
how well IL is going at the moment that came out of that.
And that's just currently being updated at the moment
as part of that ura uh, work.
Okay. Got it.
Yoda. Well, with that, I'll, I'll bring this, uh,
little hearing, this discussion to a close.
Um, I just wanna say, you know, we,
we've had a very interesting day
and we've had a number of entities, uh,
that are doing really important work in this
space, as you know.
And, um, I, I suppose part of the role of this committee is
how we can add value to this journey itself.
And, um, I always say that, you know, our primary purpose is
to, uh, uh, you know, to,
to improve Maori outcomes and, and all that.
And it's just really good that you accepted the invitation
to bring your story to us.
So you bring your journey to us.
'cause it's part of the jigsaw puzzle that we're trying
to understand here, to maximize our opportunity
of communicating perhaps up, up the building, uh, to,
to get better outcomes, uh, to get more resource, to get
what, whatever it is, uh, to get better outcomes for, for
what this tare journey is in itself.
And, uh, so I'm just always thankful that you, you, you come
before us 'cause you have a choice
and, uh, you are an important part of this journey as well.
So thank you for the mahi that you do.
And also thank you for your,
your presence today and can read for us.
So Tata.